BMI 500 Homework 3
AI-Assisted Code Generation and Experimental Workflow Record
Session date: 2026-09-16

1. PURPOSE AND DOCUMENTATION METHOD

This document records the use of AI assistance for the permitted Vec-Mat
programming task and the Scanpy profiling workflow. It identifies the assistant,
reproduces selected original prompts, summarizes the subsequent interaction,
and reports implementation decisions and observed validation results.

Quoted prompts below are verbatim excerpts from the student's initial request.
All other descriptions of the interaction are editorial summaries, not verbatim
student messages. This document is not a complete conversation transcript; the
original conversation remains the source record. Summaries do not imply that
their wording was submitted as a prompt.

2. ASSISTANT AND MODEL IDENTIFICATION

Assistant: OpenAI Codex.
Model family: GPT-6, as identified in the session instructions.
Exact backend model identifier, snapshot, or build: not exposed in the
conversation and not independently verified. The model family should not be
interpreted as an exact snapshot identifier.

3. ORIGINAL TASK PROMPTS

The student requested implementation based on the instructor's starter code,
with explicit requirements for testing, input validation, and documentation.
The following excerpts were supplied in the initial request:

"Generate/complete the implementation based on the comments in the provided file."
"Generate tests in matvec_test.py."
"Analyze likely failure modes and add appropriate guards/error handling."
"Do not unnecessarily rewrite existing starter code."
"I need to document the AI assistant, model/version, prompts, and relevant interaction in AI_code_gen.txt."
"Help me create this documentation accurately based on what we actually do."
"Start by inspecting the repository structure and README. Then identify the files relevant to the Vec-Mat task and Scanpy profiling task. Tell me what you find and propose the next immediate step."

4. SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITIES

The student required incremental work, preservation of instructor-provided
starter code, and documentation grounded in actual actions and outputs.
The Python Quiz was excluded from AI assistance. Computational experiments
on OddJobs were required to run through Slurm rather than on the login node.
Experimental measurements and review records were not to be fabricated.

Codex generated the Vec-Mat implementation and tests, prepared the profiling
instrumentation and batch script, and analyzed downloaded experimental results.
The student executed the remote setup, submission, and transfer commands and
provided terminal output for troubleshooting. The required manual review must
come from a class partner. The required independent AI review must use a
different assistant or model from the code-generation assistant.

5. VEC-MAT INTERACTION SUMMARY

Repository inspection:
Codex inspected README.md, requirements.txt, Git status, and the files relevant
to Vec-Mat and Scanpy. The working tree was initially clean. The Vec-Mat starter
contained task comments and an import of random, but no implementation.

Implementation authorization:
After receiving the initial findings and proposed next step, the student
authorized implementation and testing of Vec-Mat with concurrent documentation.

Assignment alignment:
Codex consulted the relevant lecture PDF text. Physical PDF page 58 (printed
slide 60) specified matvec_test.py and AI_code_gen.txt. Physical PDF page 76
(printed slide 78) required a different assistant for the independent AI review.
The document was used as assignment context. Existing starter comments were
preserved, and matvec_tests.py was renamed to matvec_test.py to match the
required filename.

Implementation:
Codex implemented dot_product, matvec_multiply, and main. dot_product computes
a scalar product using a for loop. matvec_multiply calls dot_product for each
matrix row. main uses a local random.Random(500) generator to construct a
reproducible 1000x1000 example and executes only when the module is run directly.
The implementation and tests require no external numerical libraries.

Validation:
Codex added unittest cases, executed them locally, and ran the demonstration.
The results are recorded in Section 7. These activities were generation-stage
validation, not the separate independent AI review required by the assignment.

6. INPUT CONTRACT AND FAILURE-MODE HANDLING

Dimension mismatches:
Vector lengths are checked before iteration to prevent silent truncation by
zip. Every matrix row must match the vector length, which also rejects ragged
matrices.

Input types:
Vectors and matrix rows must be lists or tuples containing finite real numbers.
Unsupported containers, nonnumeric values, complex numbers, and booleans raise
TypeError. Generators, NumPy arrays, arbitrary iterables, and Decimal values
are outside the supported input contract.

Nonfinite inputs and arithmetic overflow:
NaN and infinity inputs raise ValueError. Nonfinite floating-point accumulation
raises OverflowError; native Python overflow exceptions also propagate. Python
integers retain arbitrary precision without conversion to floating point.
Ordinary floating-point rounding remains possible; compensated summation and
a numerical-stability guarantee are not provided.

Empty inputs:
dot_product([], []) returns 0. An empty matrix returns an empty list. Each
zero-column row multiplied by an empty vector produces 0. The vector is
validated even when the matrix is empty.

Side effects:
The functions do not modify their inputs. Importing the module does not execute
the demonstration.

7. OBSERVED LOCAL VALIDATION

Environment: Windows, Python 3.13.7.
These checks validate Vec-Mat locally; they are not OddJobs profiling results.

Command:
python -m unittest -v matvec_test

Observed result:
Ran 15 tests; OK (all passed).

Coverage included known rectangular and identity products, negative and
fractional values, tuple inputs, zeros, empty dimensions, incompatible lengths,
ragged rows, invalid types, nonfinite values, overflow, large integers, and
preservation of the input matrix and vector.

Command:
python matvec_multiply.py

Observed output:
Result length: 1000
First five entries: [252.66209769299218, 254.89232779904555, 261.1441484737656, 249.45910607054878, 250.0933986683267]

Command:
git diff --check

Observed result:
No whitespace errors. Git emitted Windows line-ending advisories.

8. SCANPY INSTRUMENTATION AND CLUSTER SETUP

Interaction summary:
The student requested step-by-step guidance for the OddJobs workflow and supplied
terminal output after executing commands. Codex used this evidence to guide
environment configuration, resolve installation and transfer failures, and
check the progress of submitted experiments.

Instrumentation:
Codex implemented time.time-based recording in profile_sections.py and
instrumented all 16 starter sections of scanpy_pbmc.py. cProfile was applied
only to the final sc.tl.rank_genes_groups call. The Slurm script runs Python
through srun and /usr/bin/time -v, capturing console output, process statistics,
section timings, metadata, installed versions, and copies of the measured code.

Codex corrected the README's out-dir option spelling, applied the thread-count
argument, and disabled Scanpy read caching. The biological analysis calls and
parameters were preserved. The H5AD write remains before marker testing, as in
the starter, so that file does not include the subsequent marker-test results.

Environment:
The student loaded bmi/python-3.12, which provided Python 3.12.13, and created
/home/zsun264/bmi500-venv. Observed import failures were resolved by installing
anndata 0.10.8, zarr 2.18.7, and setuptools 80.9.0. The resulting installed
versions were recorded in requirements-oddjobs.txt.

Transfers and execution:
File transfers used scp -O after the default SFTP subsystem request failed.
Remote commands were executed by the student; Codex did not execute the
successful remote experiments directly. Interactive-session timeouts and SSH
disconnections were distinguished from the status of independent batch jobs.

9. EXPERIMENTAL PROVENANCE

Successful Slurm jobs:
- pbmc3k: 1289747
- pbmc6k: 1289760
- pbmc10k: 1289774

Jobs 1289755 and 1289757 failed during CPU binding before Python started and
were excluded from performance analysis. Codex changed the batch srun command
to specify --cpu-bind=cores. The student applied the same change remotely and
resubmitted the affected experiments. The successful 3K run used the earlier
binding configuration; its saved script preserves that distinction.

The student downloaded the successful run directories. Codex verified their
exit codes and completion metadata and read their actual cProfile files before
generating the analysis. Original results and measured source snapshots are
retained in the corresponding results/ directories.

10. ANALYSIS AND REPORT GENERATION

Following confirmation that the downloads were complete, Codex generated
analyze_profiles.py, profiling_report/, and scanpy_profiling.ipynb. The analysis
uses only the downloaded experimental measurements. Outputs include section
runtime plots, self-time and cumulative-time cProfile visualizations for each
dataset, CSV tables, a source hash manifest, and a profiling-only report.

The 20K scenario scales data-dependent sections of the 10K experiment by
20000/11769 while holding setup sections constant. A quadratic scenario
illustrates sensitivity to the assumed growth rate. These values are estimates,
not measurements or confidence intervals. The report documents the limitations
of single-run observations, different hosts and CPU-binding settings, profiling
overhead, cache behavior, and differences in dataset composition.

Observed local validation:
python analyze_profiles.py completed successfully, validated three successful
runs, and generated five figures. The pbmc10k cProfile chart was visually
inspected. git diff --check found no whitespace errors. Notebook code cells
remain unexecuted; embedded figures were generated by the analysis script.

11. FILES AND CURRENT STATUS

Vec-Mat:
- matvec_multiply.py
- matvec_test.py, renamed from matvec_tests.py
- AI_code_gen.txt

Profiling and reproducibility:
- scanpy_pbmc.py and profile_sections.py
- slurm/scanpy_pbmc.sbatch
- requirements-oddjobs.txt
- Successful run records under results/
- analyze_profiles.py and profiling_report/
- scanpy_profiling.ipynb
- README.md, .gitignore, and .gitattributes

Submission tracking and independent review:
- SUBMISSION_CHECKLIST.md records completed and outstanding requirements.
- The student subsequently supplied a Claude review response. Codex recorded
  and translated it in ai_code_review.txt without performing the independent
  review or changing the implementation in response. The actual prompt sent
  to Claude remains to be supplied. Model details are attributed to the
  reviewer's self-report rather than independently verified.

No Python Quiz answers were generated or modified. The class-partner manual
review remains outstanding. The notebook and PDF currently cover profiling
rather than the complete homework submission. Numba caches and regenerable
H5AD files are ignored by Git but were not deleted. Codex has not committed,
pushed, or sent the repository link to the TA.
